A machine learning approach for identifying and
delineating agricultural fields and their multi-
temporal dynamics using three decades of Landsat data
Item Type Article
Authors Li, Ting;Johansen, Kasper;McCabe, Matthew
Citation Li, T., Johansen, K., & McCabe, M. F. (2022). A machine learning
approach for identifying and delineating agricultural fields and
their multi-temporal dynamics using three decades of Landsat
data. ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing,
186, 83–101. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isprsjprs.2022.02.002
Eprint version Publisher's Version/PDF
DOI 10.1016/j.isprsjprs.2022.02.002
Publisher Elsevier BV
Journal ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing
Rights © 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of
International Society for Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing,
Inc. (ISPRS). This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-
ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Download date 2024-08-13 06:43:37
Item License http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
Link to Item http://hdl.handle.net/10754/675574

ISPRSJournalofPhotogrammetryandRemoteSensing186(2022)83–101
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/isprsjprs
A machine learning approach for identifying and delineating agricultural
fields and their multi-temporal dynamics using three decades of
Landsat data
Ting Li*, Kasper Johansen, Matthew F. McCabe*
Water Desalination and Reuse Center, Division of Biological and Environmental Sciences and Engineering, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST),
Thuwal 23955-6900, Saudi Arabia
A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T
Keywords: High spatial and temporal resolution satellite imagery are essential data for land cover discrimination and
Center-pivot field mapping of vegetation dynamics, offering insights into the number, extent, and condition of agricultural fields.
Delineation However, an accurate account of the number, location, and variability of fields can be challenging to obtain in a
DBSCAN
timely manner, particularly at scale or in regions where ground-supporting data are not available, limiting the
Convolution neural networks
capacity for food production and water use assessment and planning. To bridge this capacity gap, a convolutional
Spectral clustering
Random forest neural network approach was adopted and combined with two clustering techniques: the density-based spatial
clustering of applications with noise (DBSCAN) and spectral clustering, to provide an account of agricultural
fields and their extent across a region lacking ground based information. A random forest classification was also
employed to discriminate crop types. Using an annual maximum normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI)
derived from 2018 Landsat-8 data, the approach was applied to classify the shape and delineate the extent of
agricultural fields across an agricultural region in Saudi Arabia that had an area under irrigation exceeding

agricultural fields across an agricultural region in Saudi Arabia that had an area under irrigation exceeding
2,300 km2. When assessed against manually identified center-pivot fields (CPFs), the method achieved 97.4%
producer’s and 98.0% user’s accuracies on an object basis, and 81.4% producer’s and 85.4% user’s accuracies on
a pixel basis for identifying non-CPFs (i.e., tree crop plantations and other non-woody crops). The over- and
under-segmentation error for CPFs was 1.5% and 1.0%, respectively, with intersection over union errors reported
as being 3.5%. The framework showed stability when retrospectively applied to Landsat data from the year 2000,
returning 97.5% producer’s and 96.6% user’s accuracies for CPF identification. In order to characterize the
temporal dynamics of agricultural development over the past three decades, an analysis of field behavior be-
tween 1988 and 2020 was subsequently undertaken. The analysis indicated that the number of CPFs in the study
region increased from 45 (covering 20 km2) in 1988 to 5,080 CPFs by 2016 (covering 2,368 km2), followed by a
recent reduction to 3,700 CPFs in 2020 (covering 1,581 km2). Through the multi-temporal analysis, individual
fields were able to be characterized in terms of their expansion, contraction and activity throughout the study
period. Overall, the proposed method was simple to train, efficient in dealing with large datasets, relied on
limited in-situ records to a very small degree, and has the potential to be applied to larger national scales,
providing an ongoing assessment of important agroinformatic metrics.
water, the acreage of agricultural land under irrigation in Saudi Arabia
Globally, the agricultural sector accounts for more than two-thirds of has seen considerable increases over the last four decades. Although
global freshwater withdrawals (Pastor et al. 2019). In arid countries published reports indicate that sprinklers account for more than 60% of

global freshwater withdrawals (Pastor et al. 2019). In arid countries published reports indicate that sprinklers account for more than 60% of
such as Saudi Arabia, that figure can exceed 80%. As most arid-land the water used for irrigation in Saudi Arabia, with center-pivot systems
fresh-water abstractions are derived from groundwater, the conse- being the dominant irrigation technique (Frenken 2009), that figure
quence can be significant declines in groundwater levels and water likely underestimates the actual amount and volume (Lo´pez Valencia
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: ting.li@kaust.edu.sa (T. Li).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isprsjprs.2022.02.002
Received 24 September 2021; Received in revised form 8 December 2021; Accepted 4 February 2022
Availableonline15February2022
0924-2716/©2022TheAuthor(s). PublishedbyElsevierB.V.onbehalfofInternationalSocietyforPhotogrammetryandRemoteSensing,Inc. (ISPRS).Thisisan
openaccessarticleundertheCCBY-NC-NDlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

T. Li et al. I S P R S J o u r n a l o f P h o t o g r a m m e t r y a n d R e m o t e S e n s i n g186(2022)83–101
et al. 2020). More generally, as in many developing regions of the world, planted with perennial crops.
there is a lack of basic information on crop dynamics, acreage, and even In recent times, machine- and deep-learning techniques have become
the number of center-pivot fields (CPFs). Such information forms the the state-of-the-art in solving agricultural-related segmentation prob-
foundation of food- and water-security related studies, including the lems (Lebourgeois et al. 2017; Masoud et al. 2020). Most machine
quantification of crop water use (Aragon et al. 2018; Melton et al. 2012) learning algorithms can be broadly classified as unsupervised or su-
or crop type identification (Belgiu and Csillik 2018; Li et al. 2015; Pen˜a pervised learning algorithms (Goodfellow et al. 2016). Clustering algo-
et al. 2014). While improved use of groundwater resources and irriga- rithms, which group data according to the rules within the data itself,
tion management are required for more sustainable development, this are the most frequently employed approaches for unsupervised learning
first requires an accurate accounting and assessment of the underlying without a training stage. Density-Based Spatial Clustering of Applica-
agricultural activity. Apart from providing a needed historical account tions with Noise (DBSCAN) is an unsupervised learning algorithm that
of agricultural development, annual or semi-annual mapping of CPFs implements clustering based on the density of data points (Ester et al.
would provide insight into crop dynamics and field conditions and offer 1996). While DBSCAN has been used to segment tree trunks (Tao et al.
the information required to determine the extent to which current 2015) and identify woody components of trees (Ferrara et al. 2018) with

the information required to determine the extent to which current 2015) and identify woody components of trees (Ferrara et al. 2018) with
agricultural activity may be complying with policies designed to reduce high accuracies from LiDAR data, no study has yet examined its per-
the ‘pressure on water’ (Frenken 2009). formance for segmenting agricultural fields within satellite imagery.
Satellite images have been widely used to delineate agricultural Although DBSCAN can be expected to group image pixels into potential
fields for decades (Graesser and Ramankutty 2017; Rydberg and Bor- field units, it might struggle to separate pixels from closely connected
gefors 2001; Song et al. 2009). Indeed, one of the first satellite-based fields. In this case, another approach may be required to segment
center-pivot monitoring efforts was proposed in the 1970s under adjacent fields. Spectral clustering is a technique that has been widely
NASA’s University Affairs Program (Rundquist et al. 1989), using used for image segmentation (Shi and Malik 2000; Tung et al. 2010;
manual interpretation of Landsat-MSS imagery over Nebraska. Zhang et al. 2008), with the technique grouping data based on a simi-
Following the development of image software tools in the 1990s, larity graph, i.e. a graph where the data points are linked by edges
numerous studies have manually delineated CPFs by creating masks representing the similarity between each other (Von Luxburg 2007).
covering each individual field from both aerial and satellite imagery However, the algorithm requires the number of clusters as model input,
(Bauder 2004; Ferreira et al. 2011; Litts et al. 2001; Seth 2015). While which is generally unknown. As such, it is often impractical to run
certainly still applicable, such approaches are also laborious, time- spectral clustering on a satellite image in isolation, especially for data
consuming, and inevitably limited to smaller regions. To improve the consisting of thousands of CPFs.

consuming, and inevitably limited to smaller regions. To improve the consisting of thousands of CPFs.
scalability of agricultural field mapping, several automated and semi- In a similar vein, convolutional neural networks (CNN) have become
automated techniques have been proposed to delineate fields, one of the most employed algorithms among the range of deep learning
including edge-based, region-based, and shape-based techniques techniques. Many advanced CNNs have been developed based on the
(Mueller et al. 2004; Xia et al. 2018; Zhao et al. 2015). As their name initial CNN architecture, referred to as LeNet (LeCun et al. 1989). These
suggests, edge-based techniques focus on identifying the pixels repre- evolutions include Alexnet (Krizhevsky et al. 2012), VGGnet (Simonyan
senting field boundaries in an image. In region-based techniques, the and Zisserman 2014), and U-net (Ronneberger et al. 2015), all of which
homogeneity criterion between pixels forms the basis of grouping pixels have been successfully applied to the detection of CPFs from satellite
into objects, whereas shape-based techniques segment the imagery imagery (Saraiva et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2018). Zhang et al. (2018)
based on shape features. contributed to one of the first explorations, utilizing Landsat-5 TM to
Numerous studies have applied various edge-based (Canny 1986) analyze a 20,000 km2 region in northeast Colorado, US. In that study,
and region-based techniques e.g., multi-resolution segmentation (Baatz the authors compared the performance of three CNN models, including
2000) and watershed segmentation (Bleau and Leon 2000), to delineate LeNet, Alexnet, and VGGnet, with LeNet outperforming the others,
agricultural fields within satellite imagery (Duro et al. 2012; Turker and achieving 95.85% user’s and 93.33% producer’s accuracies. However,
Kok 2013; Vieira et al. 2012). In another approach, Yan and Roy (2016) only the central location of each CPF was identified, with the extent of

Kok 2013; Vieira et al. 2012). In another approach, Yan and Roy (2016) only the central location of each CPF was identified, with the extent of
utilized one-year of Landsat-5 and 7 time series data together with the each field remaining unmapped. The fully convolutional network (FCN),
United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) cropland data layer to which has its basis in CNN, is another state of the art approach for
quantify crop fields over the conterminous United States. When evalu- agricultural field segmentation (Long et al. 2015; Persello et al. 2019).
ated against reference data, 81.4% of the extracted field objects were Among various types of FCNs, the U-net model is the most frequently
correctly matched, with field size being underestimated by 1.2% on employed method for identifying CPFs. However, U-net has shown sig-
average. However, any requirement for crop type information can pre- nificant limitations, including an inability to detect commonly occurring
sent as an impediment for wider application in regions where such data fan-shaped CPFs, where only a part of a CPF is in use (Saraiva et al.
are not readily available. Graesser and Ramankutty (2017) proposed a 2020) and the merging of all CPFs into one layer instead of delineating
method that incorporated multi-spectral image edge extraction, multi- individual fields (de Albuquerque et al. 2020; Graf et al. 2020). Instance
scale contrast limited adaptive histogram equalization, and adaptive segmentation using the region-based CNNs (e.g. Mask-RCNN) is another
thresholding to detect cropland field parcels in agricultural landscapes approach that has been applied to delineate CPFs (Carvalho et al. 2021;
across much of South America. Using Landsat Surface Reflectance de Albuquerque et al. 2021a; de Albuquerque et al. 2021b). While CPFs
Climate Data Record products the method achieved a 91% f-score. In have been delineated successfully with Mask-RCNN, the need for poly-

Climate Data Record products the method achieved a 91% f-score. In have been delineated successfully with Mask-RCNN, the need for poly-
another large-scale approach, Johansen et al. (2021) developed an gons masking individual CPFs in the training stage precludes its appli-
object-based rule set that included edge detection and multiple object cation to regions where such data are not available. Instead of
shape refinement steps to delineate CPFs across Saudi Arabia. Using employing a single algorithm to delineate CPFs (Mekhalfi et al. 2021;
Landsat-8 imagery collected over a 3-year period, they achieved a field Tang et al. 2021b), some studies have developed hybrid frameworks
detection accuracy of 94% for approximately 37,000 fields. Watkins and combining different algorithms for this task. Waldner and Diakogiannis
van Niekerk (2019) compared a framework combining two edge-based (2020) combined ResUNet-a and watershed segmentation to extract
and three regional-based techniques to delineate field boundaries in field boundaries using Sentinel-2 image data as input. The method
South Africa using Sentinel-2 imagery. They found that Canny edge- proposed by Tang et al. (2021a) combining PVANET, GoogLeNet, and
detection in conjunction with watershed segmentation, provided an the Hough transform only required annotation of the location of a CPF
overall accuracy of 92.9% against a manually created reference using a rectangular box and whether an image object consisted of CPFs
boundary dataset. While CPFs were successfully delineated into indi- or non-CPFs. The delineation was conducted by identifying the center
vidual fields, it was unclear if the method would be feasible for fields point and radius of a CPF obtained from the Hough transform. Although
84

T. Li et al. I S P R S J o u r n a l o f P h o t o g r a m m e t r y a n d R e m o t e S e n s i n g186(2022)83–101
incomplete circles, i.e. fan-shaped CPFs, were identified, the boundary individual fields were in use). The motivating goal for this framework
of these fields was delineated as a full circle, risking an overestimation of was to provide base-level information of relevance to studies exploring
field acreage. crop type mapping, management of crop water usage, and crop yield
Since the use of any single algorithm has previously demonstrated prediction, and to propose an approach that could be applied to
clear limitations for delineating fields, a hybrid machine learning information-sparse regions typical of the developing world.
framework was explored. By employing a hybrid approach, each of the
algorithms performs its own specific function, but combine to provide a 2. Study site and data description
comprehensive solution. Indeed, while a number of machine learning
models (e.g. FCNs and Mask-CNNs) can learn from the field boundary or 2.1. Study site: the Al Jawf agricultural region in Saudi Arabia
field mask information in the training dataset (Long et al. 2015; Masoud
et al. 2020; Persello et al. 2019), such datasets are not always routinely The Al Jawf region in northwest Saudi Arabia is one of the largest
available (as in Saudi Arabia and most other regions worldwide). agricultural regions in the Kingdom (see Fig. 1). While agricultural
Manually creating the field boundaries or field mask is a time- development was initiated in the 1980s, it increased rapidly to cover an
consuming and potentially biased process, albeit one of the most irrigated area larger than 1,500 km2 by 2005 (FAO 2013), with more
frequent methods used to overcome this training data gap. However, than 90% of the fields being irrigated by abstracted groundwater (Al-

frequent methods used to overcome this training data gap. However, than 90% of the fields being irrigated by abstracted groundwater (Al-
such manual processing is impractical for large regions or dynamic Rumkhani and Din 2004). Most of the center-pivot systems are generally
features such as CPFs. Here, we implement an approach that does not uniform in diameter (approximately 800 m) and adjacent to each other
require field delineation training data by instead identifying the shape of in a well-organized spatial pattern. However, the fields in the north-
a field object and determining whether or not it consists of multiple western domain are more sporadic, with the field diameter smaller than
fields: an approach that is both appropriate to the region and considerate those in the central portion of the study site. The most recent crop in-
of the data that is available. The data required (and available) to drive formation from the General Authority for Statistics in Saudi Arabia
machine learning approaches is a key consideration in model-choice. In (GASTAT, 2018), indicates that for 2014, the dominant crop types were
our case, Saudi Arabia is representative of the vast majority of regions cereals (including wheat, millet, broom-corn, maize, barley, and ses-
outside of the developed world, where even basic agroinformatic data is ame), vegetables (including tomato, potato, marrow, eggplant, okra,
not routinely available. Ultimately, we seek a compromise between us- carrot, dry onion, cucumber, melon, and watermelon), fodder (mainly
ability, data availability, and computational efficiency. To identify the clover), and fruit (including dates, citrus, and grapes). The average
shape of agricultural fields (circle, fan, or others such as plantations), temperature in this region ranges from 10 to 32 ◦C, with the lowest and
delineate the extent of the fields, and discriminate broad crop types (i.e., highest temperatures occurring in December - January and July -

delineate the extent of the fields, and discriminate broad crop types (i.e., highest temperatures occurring in December - January and July -
tree crop plantations and other non-woody crops), we propose an August, respectively (Lo´pez Valencia et al. 2020).
innovative framework to delineate individual fields by employing an
approach that incorporates four machine learning techniques. The major
element of this work combines DBSCAN, CNN classification, and spec- 2.2. Landsat data pre-processing
tral clustering in a stepwise manner to identify and delineate both cir-
cular and fan shapes agriculture fields using Landsat-8 data. Following To develop a long-term time series of satellite data, imagery from
this, a random forest (RF) classification model (Belgiu and Dr˘agut¸, 2016; Landsat-4/5 Thematic Mapper (TM), Landsat-7 Enhanced Thematic
Phalke et al., 2020; Rodriguez-Galiano et al., 2012a,b) was trained and Mapper (ETM+), and Landsat-8 Operational Land Imager (OLI)were
applied to determine if a non-CPF represented a tree crop plantation or acquired. Level 2 surface reflectance data of 30-m resolution from path/
other non-woody plant crops. Once the framework was developed and row 172/39 were downloaded from the United States Geological Survey
tested, a second objective was to apply the approach to a long time series (USGS) EarthExplorer website (https://earthexplorer.usgs.gov/) for the
of Landsat data: in this case, covering the period from 1988 to 2020. This period covering 1988 to 2020 (note that 1988 was the first year when
time series analysis allowed an assessment of the change and develop- CPFs were observed within the region). The surface reflectance data
ment in CPFs over the last three decades, including information on were created by the Land Surface Reflectance Code algorithm (Vermote
acreage for each field, field expansion or field decrease, as well as et al. 2016) for Landsat-8 imagery and the Landsat Ecosystem Distur-

acreage for each field, field expansion or field decrease, as well as et al. 2016) for Landsat-8 imagery and the Landsat Ecosystem Distur-
determining the active status of the fields (i.e. the number of years that bance Adaptive Processing System algorithm (Schmidt et al. 2013) for
the Landsat-4/5 and Landsat-7 imagery. Cloud-contaminated images
Fig. 1. False-color images of the study site (Landsat-8 path/row 172/39 collected on July 20, 2018). The four yellow rectangles indicate sampling regions to train
and validate the CNN model. Each region covered 15 ×20 km. The arrows in the bottom right pointed to the north direction of each sampling region.
85

T. Li et al. I S P R S J o u r n a l o f P h o t o g r a m m e t r y a n d R e m o t e S e n s i n g186(2022)83–101
Table 1
The number of available images and selected images after excluding cloud contaminated images for each year (1988–2020) obtained from January 1 to December 31.
Year Landsat Mission Available images Selected images Year Landsat Mission Available images Selected images Year Landsat Mission Available images Selected images
1988 Landsat-4/5 TM 21 18 1999 Landsat-5 TM 21 20 2010 Landsat-5 TM 16 15
1989 Landsat-4/5 TM 15 13 2000 Landsat-5 TM 18 17 2011 Landsat-5 TM 8 8
1990 Landsat-4/5 TM 17 15 2001 Landsat-5 TM 23 18 2012 Landsat-7 ETM+ 20 18
1991 Landsat-4/5 TM 20 16 2002 Landsat-7 ETM+ 16 16 2013 Landsat-8 OLI 20 17
1992 Landsat-5 TM 16 15 2003 Landsat-7 ETM+ 14 13 2014 Landsat-8 OLI 21 17
1993 Landsat-5 TM 16 12 2004 Landsat-5 TM 19 19 2015 Landsat-8 OLI 23 21
1994 Landsat-5 TM 18 15 2005 Landsat-5 TM 13 11 2016 Landsat-8 OLI 23 21
1995 Landsat-5 TM 22 22 2006 Landsat-5 TM 12 9 2017 Landsat-8 OLI 23 23
1996 Landsat-5 TM 20 18 2007 Landsat-5 TM 12 12 2018 Landsat-8 OLI 23 19
1997 Landsat-5 TM 21 21 2008 Landsat-5 TM 13 11 2019 Landsat-8 OLI 23 19
1998 Landsat-5 TM 22 22 2009 Landsat-5 TM 17 15 2020 Landsat-8 OLI 21 18
were manually excluded (Table 1). Landsat-7 data for 2002, 2003, and (Section 3.4) to discriminate the vegetation cover of non-CPFs (i.e., tree
2012 were utilized due to the limited availability of Landsat-5 scenes in crop plantations or other non-woody crops). The DBSCAN, spectral
those years. Co-registration was applied to the satellite scenes using the clustering, and RF classification were implemented using the “Scikit-
AROSICS python package (https://pypi.org/project/arosics/), learn” Python package (Pedregosa et al. 2011), while the CNN training,
following the approach of Scheffler et al. (2017). As the Landsat tile validation, and prediction were performed using PyTorch (Mishra

following the approach of Scheffler et al. (2017). As the Landsat tile validation, and prediction were performed using PyTorch (Mishra
covers slightly different regions, all the scenes were subset to the 2019). The evaluation process is detailed in Section 3.5, while a sum-
maximum overlap covering 6084 ×6346 pixels. mary of the framework is presented in Section 3.6. The methods for
NDVI is one of the most frequently employed satellite-based vege- multi-temporal analysis of field dynamics using three decades of Landsat
tation indices and is used to characterize a variety of vegetation prop- data are described in Section 3.7.
erties. NDVI maps were computed from the red and near-infrared bands
for each Landsat scene from 1988 to 2020
3.1. Density-based spatial clustering of applications with noise (DBSCAN)
NIR(cid:0) red
NDVI= (1) clustering
NIR+red
DBSCAN is an algorithm that clusters a dataset based on the density
where NIR and red are the surface reflectance of the near-infrared and
of data points (or pixels in this particular study). The advantage of
red bands, respectively. Four maps for each year were obtained by
DBSCAN is that the clustering is performed based on the density of the
extracting 1) the maximum, 2) standard derivation, 3) median, and 4)
points such that no prior knowledge about the number of clusters is
the difference between the maximum and minimum of the annual NDVI
required. In addition, the algorithm is efficient at dealing with noise
time series. The annual maximum NDVI map served as the base map for
within a dataset since points in regions with low density will be classi-
the identification and delineation of the fields and all four maps served
fied as noise and omitted. Two global parameters are set by the user,
as the input features of RF for crop type classification.
including the radius (Eps) for a point to search for its neighbors and the
number of neighbors (MinPts) within Eps (Tan et al. 2006). For a single

including the radius (Eps) for a point to search for its neighbors and the
number of neighbors (MinPts) within Eps (Tan et al. 2006). For a single
2.3. Ground truth data pixel, the number of border pixels (neighbors) was four. One cluster in
DBSCAN is defined as a maximal set of density-connected points or, in
Two ground truth datasets were prepared to evaluate the perfor- other words, the density of points within a cluster is higher than the
mance of the framework based on data from the years 2000 and 2018. density of points outside the cluster (Ferrara et al. 2018; Tan et al. 2006).
The agricultural fields within the study region in both 2000 and 2018 The selection of Eps and MinPts determines if a point is a core, border, or
were manually delineated using ArcMap based on the respective annual noise point and further affects the clustering result (Tan et al. 2006).
maximum NDVI maps. Each field was masked by a polygon and was DBSCAN was converted by Campello et al. (2013) into a hierarchical
labeled as being a circular CPF, a fan-shaped CPF, or other (non-CPFs). clustering algorithm: HDBSCAN, which applies DBSCAN over various
All fields in 2018, excluding those in the four sampling regions (yellow Eps and finds the most stable clustering result over different Eps. In other
rectangles in Fig. 1), were used as a ground truth dataset and accounted words, HDBSCAN can find clusters with varying densities, which
for a total of 3,690 circular CPF covering 1,815 km2, 319 fan-shaped DBSCAN is unable to do (McInnes et al. 2017). While HDBSCAN out-
fields covering 88 km2, and non-CPFs covering 66.7 km2. In a similar performs DBSCAN from several aspects (Campello et al. 2013), it was
manner, all fields obtained using Landsat-5 data in 2000 were used as not deemed suitable for this research since the intensity of CPFs in the
another ground truth dataset to examine the application of the frame- study region showed spatial variation (Fig. 1). Therefore, DBSCAN was

another ground truth dataset to examine the application of the frame- study region showed spatial variation (Fig. 1). Therefore, DBSCAN was
work to different epochs. In 2000, a total of 1,640 circular fields employed instead of HDBSCAN.
covering 884 km2, 136 fan-shaped fields covering 28.2 km2, and non- In our study, the data points in DBSCAN represented pixels in a raster
CPFs covering 43.3 km2 were included. image, i.e., the annual maximum NDVI map. Before running the
DBSCAN, the annual maximum NDVI map was filtered by a threshold of
3. Description of the machine learning approaches and NDVI (NDVIthresh) to enhance the difference between the density of
framework pixels within the agricultural fields and the bare soil background. After
the filtering, the coordinates of each pixel remaining on the thresholded
A combination of four machine learning techniques formed the basis annual maximum NDVI map were recorded as row and column loca-
of the delineation framework. These comprised: 1) DBSCAN (Section tions. By doing so, a two-dimensional da[taset was created t[o repr]e]sent
3.1) to segment the pixels of the Landsat-based annual maximum NDVI the pixels to be clustered, expressed as [x1,y1],[x2,y2],⋯, xn,yn , in
map into potential field objects; 2) CNN classification (Section 3.2) to which n was the total number of pixels remaining on the thresholded
identify the type of field objects (i.e., one circular CPF, one fan-shaped annual maximum NDVI map. Examination of the annual maximum
CPF, one non-CPF, multiple non-CPFs, merged fields, and noise); 3) NDVI image determined that Eps and MinPts, of 3 and 29, respectively,
spectral clustering (Section 3.3) to further segment multiple non-CPFs provided a suitable compromise for the study site for the Landsat im-
and merged fields into individual fields; and 4) RF classification agery. The whole framework was implemented with NDVIthresh =0.25 to
86

T. Li et al. I S P R S J o u r n a l o f P h o t o g r a m m e t r y a n d R e m o t e S e n s i n g186(2022)83–101
identify the CPFs first. Then, all pixels identified as CPFs were excluded 3.2. Convolutional neural networks (CNN)
from the annual maximum NDVI map and another NDVIthresh =0.15 was
applied to identify and delineate the non-CPFs. NDVIthresh =0.15 was 3.2.1. Architecture of CNN
used because tree crop plantations in the study region occurred with A CNN is an artificial neural network, a computational approach
lower annual maximum NDVI values than crops in CPFs, which could inspired by biological neural networks that process the information by
easily be excluded by NDVIthresh =0.25. However, initial processing with neurons (also referred to as nodes) (Hopfield 1982). The nodes in three
NDVIthresh = 0.15 for CPFs was not efficient in filtering out the back- layers (i.e., one input layer, several hidden layers, and one output layer)
ground pixels and hence resulted in CPFs being merged. Therefore, to in the artificial neural networks are connected by modeled weights
keep and map tree plantation pixels, while also segmenting the CPFs (Schmidhuber 2015). The connections in the networks are updated
efficiently, two NDVIthresh values were applied. iteratively to minimize the error between the predicted outputs and the
DBSCAN clustering can result in clusters consisting of a different actual outputs. In this application, we selected Alexnet (Fig. S2) due to
number of pixels ranging from one to over several thousand. Two its previous success in identifying CPFs within satellite imagery (Zhang
thresholds were set to identify the “large” clusters (by nhigh) that con- et al. 2018) and simple architecture. The architecture of the Alexnet
sisted of more than a single CPF, and the “small” clusters (by nlow) that model used in our study reflects that published by Krizhevsky et al.

sisted of more than a single CPF, and the “small” clusters (by nlow) that model used in our study reflects that published by Krizhevsky et al.
consisted of too few pixels to represent a CPF. The predominant center- (2012) and is shown in Fig. S2.
pivot system had a diameter of 800 m, covering approximately 550
Landsat pixels. Although the size of fields varied in the study region, it 3.2.2. Alexnet training and validation
was reasonable to assume that a cluster consisting of more than nhigh = Alexnet is a supervised learning technique requiring ground truth
5,000 pixels was formed by multiple fields, while a cluster consisting of labels to train and validate the model. As described in Section 3.1,
less than nlow = 20 pixels was not a valid field. Small clusters were DBSCAN clustering was performed on the four sampling regions (see
eliminated from the framework, while large clusters were re-clustered yellow rectanglesin Fig. 1) to obtain representative ground truth data.
by another four iterations of DBSCAN clustering. Large clusters always The objects obtained after running DBSCAN were labeled as 1–6, rep-
consisted of pixels from multiple fields with overlapping boundaries. resenting: (1) noisy objects that did not form a valid field, (2) a single
The pixels along the field edges frequently comprised soil background circular CPF, (3) a single fan CPF (part of the CPF), (4) a single non-CPF,
and thus had lower NDVI values than pixels fully covered by vegetation. (5) multiple non-CPFs, and (6) merged fields consisting of multiple fields
The elimination of such areas assisted DBSCAN in clustering multiple (Fig. 2). The objects were mirrored and rotated to different angles (i.e.,
fields with overlapping boundaries into individual fields. Hence, before 90, 180, and 270 degrees) to balance the number of samples for each
re-running DBSCAN to segment the large clusters, pixels with NDVI label. To increase the number of samples, small random perturbations

re-running DBSCAN to segment the large clusters, pixels with NDVI label. To increase the number of samples, small random perturbations
values in the lowest 5% of the cluster were eliminated. were added to or subtracted from the NDVI matrices, while ensuring that
After running the iterative DBSCAN clustering, pixels within the the values within the matrix only ranged between 0 and 1. In total, 6,125
thresholded annual maximum NDVI map were clustered into various samples were created for each category, with 70% of these samples
objects: 1) objects that did not form an agricultural field; 2) a single CPF being randomly selected (from each category) to train the Alexnet
but with different shape (i.e., circular or fan shape); 3) fields not rep- model, while the remainder was used for validation.
resenting a circular or fan shape field (non-CPFs); or 4) merged multiple The cross-entropy loss in the Alexnet model was updated by back-
fields. An m ×n NDVI matrix was created for pixels within each cluster propagation using the mini-batch gradient descent method with the
with their coordinates. Then, the m ×n matrix was padded to m ×m (if momentum, which is common in CNN training for classification to
m ≥ n) or n × n (if n > m), with zeros filling the padded cells. The reduce the fluctuation of loss degradation and speed up the model
squared NDVI matrices served as input to the subsequent CNN classifi- training (Garcia-Garcia et al. 2018). As suggested by Ruder (2016), the
cation. An example of the DBSCAN clustering procedure is shown in learning rate and momentum coefficient were set to 0.001 and 0.9,
Fig. S1. respectively. In the first iteration of training, the weights for the
Fig. 2. Examples of field objects in six categories. Label 1 presented noisy objects that did not form a valid field. Labels 2, 3, and 4 represented a single circular

Fig. 2. Examples of field objects in six categories. Label 1 presented noisy objects that did not form a valid field. Labels 2, 3, and 4 represented a single circular
center-pivot field (CPF), a single fan-shaped CPF, and a single non-CPF, respectively. Label 5 presented objects consisting of multiple non-CPFs, while Label 6
characterized objects consisting of merged fields from Labels 1 to 5. These objects were manually labeled for training and validation of the CNN classification model.
87

T. Li et al. I S P R S J o u r n a l o f P h o t o g r a m m e t r y a n d R e m o t e S e n s i n g186(2022)83–101
convolutional and fully connected layers in the Alexnet were initialized (Nclu) as input to run the algorithm. In our study, thousands of objects
by the He initialization (He et al. 2015): a popular weight initialization required re-clustering by the spectral clustering step. A procedure to
method for ReLu activation functions. Fifty percent of the nodes in the automatically search for the optimal number of clusters of field objects
first two fully-connected layers were randomly dropped from the consisting of multiple fields (Label 6 in Fig. 2) was explored by assessing
network to preclude model overfitting, as suggested by Hinton et al. the performance of two indices: the Silhouette coefficient (Rousseeuw
(2012). 1987) and the Calinski-Harabasz index (Calin´ski and Harabasz 1974),
Among all the hyperparameters needed to train the Alexnet model, which combine both cohesion and separation of clustering results for
the mini-batch size was the only one requiring tuning based on our indicating the optimal number of clusters. Our experiment suggested
parameter selection The general mini-batch size for training a CNN that the Calinski-Harabasz index performed well in predicting the
model ranges from 2 to 2014, increasing by powers of 2 (Radiuk 2017). optimal number of clusters (result not shown here). However, a list of
Experiments were conducted with different batch sizes (including 2, 4, Nclu candidates for each object was required to reduce the computational
8, 16, 32, 64, and 128 images) to find the optimal mini-batch size for our time when searching for the optimal Nclu value. The number of pixels for
dataset. The training stage stopped when the average loss for 400 each re-clustered object was divided by a threshold value (pthresh), which

dataset. The training stage stopped when the average loss for 400 each re-clustered object was divided by a threshold value (pthresh), which
consecutive iterations was smaller than 0.005, or the epoch (i.e., the indicated the approximate number of pixels forming a CPF in the study
number of passes of the entire training dataset by the algorithm) reached region. The value of pthresh was selected based on a CPF with an 800 m
100. The Alexnet performance was evaluated by the training time and diameter, resulting in approximately 550 Landsat-8 pixels. Relaxed
four indices that are usually employed to assess a supervised classifi- upper and lower boundaries of the Nclu candidates were required to
cation algorithm: producer’s accuracy, user’s accuracy, F1, and overall adapt the framework to varying sizes of center-pivot systems. After
accuracy (Olson and Delen 2008). The four indices are calculated as: testing on the sampling regions, the range of Nclu candidates was set
Producer accuracy = TP/(TP+ FN), User accuracy = TP/(TP+ FP), based on the following rules:
F1 = 2/(1/Producer accuracy+ 1/User accuracy), and
overall accuracy =(TP+TN)/(TP+TN+FP+FN), where TP, FN, FP, if ratio ≤1, Nclu ∈[2,3];
and TN are the numbers of true positives, false negatives, false positives, if 1 <ratio ≤10, Nclu ∈[2, ⌈(ratio+5)⌉], with ⌈⌉ indicating round up
and true negatives, respectively. Balancing the model training time and to an integer; and ⌊( )⌋
accuracy, the experiment suggested that a batch size of 16 was optimal,
with the producer’s accuracy, user’s accuracy, F1, and overall accuracy
if ratio > 10, Nclu ∈ [ ra 3tio ,⌈(ratio+5)⌉ ], with ⌊⌋ indicating
all exceeding 0.99. Thus, the Alexnet model was trained with a batch round down to an integer;
size of 16 to predict the shape of the fields.
where ratio = the number of pixels of an object/pthresh. On the other
3.3. Spectral clustering
hand, Nclu was constrained to two for re-clustering objects consisting of

where ratio = the number of pixels of an object/pthresh. On the other
3.3. Spectral clustering
hand, Nclu was constrained to two for re-clustering objects consisting of
multiple non-CPFs (Label 5 in Fig. 2) because of the uncertain pixel
number that formed a non-CPF. This re-clustering for non-CPFs was
3.3.1. Algorithm of spectral clustering
necessary since the CNN might classify some objects consisting of CPFs
Spectral clustering was employed to re-cluster the objects identified
as non-CPFs. By re-clustering objects that consisted of non-CPFs, CPFs
as multiple fields by Alexnet (Labels 5 and 6 in Fig. 2) into individual
could be segmented from the non-CPFs and classified to the correct
fields. Spectral clustering is a classic approach for clustering non-linear
dataset based on a similarity graph, which is expressed as G =(V, E, W), category in the subsequent analysis.
in which V is the set of vertices vi (with each vi representing a data point
3.3.2. Enhancement of spectral clustering
xi); E is the set of edges between vi; and W represents the weight for the
edges (Dhillon et al. 2004). In this study, the normalized spectral clus-
The optimal Nclu obtained in Section 3.3.1 for label 6 might result in
tering proposed and described by Ng et al. (2002) was employed. The
over-segmentation or under-segmentation errors when Nclu was higher
or lower than the actual number of fields. Procedures were designed to
weight matrix was formed by the Gaussian kernel function of the
reduce such errors. Over-segmentation error caused a single circular
gradient of NDVI values of adjacent pixels, i.e., the difference in NDVI
field to be segmented into several evenly divided fans, which resulted in
values of two adjacent pixels, with the weights being zero for nonadja-
linear boundaries of geographically adjacent clusters. To address this,
cent pixels, and is expressed as:
the boundary pixels of two geographically adjacent clusters were
g2

linear boundaries of geographically adjacent clusters. To address this,
cent pixels, and is expressed as:
the boundary pixels of two geographically adjacent clusters were
g2
W ij=exp((cid:0) 2σi,j 2) if i∕=j,and W ii=0 (2) c co enu tn cte lud s.
t
I ef
r
st h ee
x
cn eu em deb de r
a
o vf
a
lb uo eu on fd 8a ,r ty
h
ep i Px ee als
r
so of
n
t cw oo
r
rg ee lao tg iora np ch oi ec fa fill cy
i
ea nd tj oa f-
the pixel coordinates (with x and y indicating the rows and columns of
where Wij was the weight of pixel i and j; gi,j was the difference in NDVI
pixels in the object) was computed. If that correlation coefficient
values of pixels i and j; gi,j was the gradient of NDVI values of adjacent
exceeded a value of 0.8, the two clusters were merged into one cluster.
pixels; and σ was the standard deviation of the values in the distance These two constraints were selected based on a priori experiment. For
matrix formed by gi,j. The degree of point xi is the sum of all edge weights under-segmentation error, the algorithm failed to segment pixels from
between xi and its adjacent data points, and is defined as (Von Luxburg multiple fields into individual fields. Spectral clustering was run mul-
2007): tiple times to address this problem. Before being re-clustered, pixels with
∑
d i= n j=1w ij (3) N thD
e
V fiI ev la dl u ee ds
g
i en
,
t whe
e
rl eo w ele is mt i5 n%
at
eo df t th oe ac sl su is st te r s,
p
p ecri tm raa
l
r cil ly
u
so tc ec ru inr gri .n Tg ha el o rn eg
-
clustering procedure stopped when the iteration reached five, the ob-
The degree matrix D for a dataset with n data points is a matrix with d1,
ject with label 5 consisted of less than 500 pixels, or no object was
d2,d3,⋯,dn on the diagonal. Then the Laplacian matrix is then defined
predicted as Label 5 or 6 by Alexnet. Three examples of spectral clus-
as (Von Luxburg 2007):
tering with different Alextnet predicted labels are shown in Fig. S3.
L=D(cid:0) W (4)
3.4. Random forest classification

as (Von Luxburg 2007):
tering with different Alextnet predicted labels are shown in Fig. S3.
L=D(cid:0) W (4)
3.4. Random forest classification
The target of spectral clustering was to find the eigenvectors with the
first k smallest eigenvalues by solving Lx =λDx, where k was the target After running the procedures described in Sections 3.1 to 3.3, two
number of clusters input by the user. labels were assigned to the pixels of the annual maximal NDVI map, i.e.
Spectral clustering requires the number of clusters to be produced the clustering label for each field and the CNN classification label
88

T. Li et al. I S P R S J o u r n a l o f P h o t o g r a m m e t r y a n d R e m o t e S e n s i n g186(2022)83–101
indicating the field shape. The non-CPFs were classified by an RF model pixels of a cluster was better than the pixel-based mask since some of the
to discriminate if they presented tree crops or other non-woody crops. pixels within the fields might be eliminated during the processing. These
Four features were employed as the input for the RF model, including eliminated pixels can be recovered when we use polygons to extract all
the maximum, the standard derivation, the median, and the difference of pixels forming each field from the base maps (e.g., annual maximum
maximum and minimum of the annual NDVI time series values. NDVI map).
The framework was evaluated based on the field detection accuracy
3.4.1. Random forest algorithm and the delineation accuracy. The field detection accuracy was assessed
RF classification is based upon building a number of individual de- at an object level for circular and fan-shaped CPFs and a pixel level for
cision trees, with each decision tree constructed by bootstrapping sam- non-CPFs. The pixel-level evaluation was used for non-CPFs because the
ples from the training dataset with replacement. A random subset or 30 m spatial resolution imagery precluded the detection of field edges
combination of variables is tested at each tree node to partition the for some of the non-CPFs (but especially for tree crop plantations),
training data into increasingly homogeneous subsets. The variable resulting in objects consisting of indivisible multiple non-CPFs. The
subset, which results in the greatest increase in data purity (e.g., highest producer’s accuracy and user’s accuracy were presented to quantify the
Gini), is chosen for this node (Breiman 2001). After the forest of decision detection accuracy of CPFs. However, the overall accuracy was

Gini), is chosen for this node (Breiman 2001). After the forest of decision detection accuracy of CPFs. However, the overall accuracy was
trees is constructed, the final classification result is accomplished by excluded, since the framework-delineated fields did not completely
voting based on all the trees, i.e., each tree will give a label to the input match the fields in the ground truth map due to over- and under-
data. The label voted by most of the trees would be assigned as the final segmentation errors.
classification result. The delineation accuracy of CPFs was evaluated by the over-
segmentation (Sover) and under-segmentation (Sunder) indices described
3.4.2. Random forest classification model training and validation by Clinton et al. (2010) and utilized by Yan and Roy (2014) for assess-
Pixels occupied by tree crop plantations and other crops in sampling ment of the field delineation accuracy, which are defined as:
region 4 (shown in Fig. 1) were manually labeled using Landsat-8 im- ( ⋂ )
|T E|
agery in 2018 based on information obtained from a previous in-person S under(E j;T i)= 1(cid:0) ⃒ ⃒i E⃒ ⃒j ×100% (5)
field survey. A total of 58,000 pixels were selected for each label, and j
five-fold cross-validation (Schaffer 1993) was applied to select the ( ⋂ )
o tip ot nim
,
ta hl
e
i dn ap tu at
s
eh ty ip se sr pp la itr a inm toet fier vs
e
o sf
u
t bh se
e
tm
s.
o Td he el .
R
I Fn mfiv oe d- ef lo il sd tc rr ao inss e- dv a ul si id na g- S over(E j;T i)= 1(cid:0) |T i
|T
iE |j| ×100% (6)
four of the folds and is evaluated on the rest of the data. A grid search
was applied to identify the optimal combination of the hyperparameters, where Ej represented the pixels from a framework-delineated field and
including the number of trees ([10, 50, 100, 150, 200, 250, 300]), √th ̅̅e
̅̅
Ti included the manually delineated pixels of a field from the ground

including the number of trees ([10, 50, 100, 150, 200, 250, 300]), √th ̅̅e
̅̅
Ti included the manually delineated pixels of a field from the ground
number of variables to consider when looking for the best split ([ N, truth map. If Ej intersected with multiple fields in the ground truth map
log N], where N is the number of input features) (Breiman 2001), and or Ti intersected with multiple fields on the framework-delineated map,
2
the function to measure the quality of a split (‘gini’, ‘entropy’) (Raileanu Equations (5) and (6) were computed only for the field that had the most
and Stoffel 2004). The combination of the hyperparameters that gave intersecting pixels. Sunion, an index computed from the root mean square
the highest mean value of overall accuracy in the five-fold cross-vali- of Sunder and Sover, was also employed:
√̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
dation was employed to retrain the model using all the sampling data.
S2 +S2
T pah re
a
mfiv ee te-f ro sl ed
t
c wro as ss [-v 3a 0l 0id
,
a loti gon
N
,e ’x ep ne tr ri om pe yn ’]t fs ou rg tg he es t ned
u
mth ba et
r
oth
f
e
t
reo ep st ,i m tha el S union(i,j)= over(i,j)
2
under(i,j) (7)
2
number of features when looking for the best split, and the function to
measure the quality of a split, with a mean overall accuracy of 0.98. The
Sunder, Sover, and Sunion provide values ranging from 0 to 100%, with a
value of 0 defining a perfect delineation result and a value of 100%
RF model was trained on a pixel basis. However, the prediction was
indicating either a high degree of under-segmentation error, over-
applied on an object basis since the standard deviation, median, and
segmentation error, or combined under- and over-segmentation error,
maximum-minimum difference maps for Landsat-7 data were affected
respectively. The Intersection over Union (IoU) error (Huang et al. 2020)
by the SLC-off from May 31, 2003. Pixels affected by the SLC-off error
was also employed, which is defined as:

respectively. The Intersection over Union (IoU) error (Huang et al. 2020)
by the SLC-off from May 31, 2003. Pixels affected by the SLC-off error
was also employed, which is defined as:
showed extremely low NDVI values and resulted in wrong measures of
the input features, which would mislead the RF classification when IoU(A,B) error=(1(cid:0) area(A∩B)/area(A∪B))×100% (8)
identifying the crop types. To overcome this influence, the RF prediction
from 1988 to 2020 was constructed at the field level using the field For a CPF, A was a mapped field based on the machine learning ap-
delineation result obtained from Sections 3.1 to 3.3. The median value of proaches, and B represented a ground truth field. The IoU error ranges
the maximum, the standard deviation, median, and maximum-minimum from 0 to 100%, with a value of 100% indicating an incorrect result and
difference value of each delineated field was computed based on the a value of 0 indicating a correct result. In addition, four standard sta-
pixels that were unaffected by the SLC-off error and presented the input tistical metrics frequently employed to evaluate model performance
feature of the RF classification. were computed based on the area of the fields in the framework-
delineated map and in the ground truth map. These included the coef-
ficient of determination (R2), the mean absolute bias deviation (MAD),
3.5. Evaluation of the framework the relative MAD (rMAD), and relative mean bias deviation (rMBD), with
the latter two being the absolute or mean bias divided by the mean of the
As there was no ground-truth data available to actually evaluate the number of pixels of extracted fields.
output from the RF model, we were unable to identify the crop type (tree
crop plantation or other crops) of non-CPFs, except for within sampling
region 4. There were fewer than 70 km2 of fields that were not repre- 3.6. Framework overview
senting circular or fan-shaped fields over the approximately 1,970 km2

region 4. There were fewer than 70 km2 of fields that were not repre- 3.6. Framework overview
senting circular or fan-shaped fields over the approximately 1,970 km2
of the agricultural area in the evaluation region in 2018. Our main focus A summary of the processing workflow is presented in Fig. 3. Using
was to assess the field identification and delineation results from Sec- annual Landsat surface reflectance imagery as initial input (Step 1), the
tions 3.1 to 3.3. A shapefile consisting of polygons representing each of annual maximum NDVI map was first developed (Step 2) and then used
the individual fields was produced. A polygon created by boundary to eliminate pixels with NDVI values below NDVIthresh (=0.25) (Step 3).
89

T. Li et al. I S P R S J o u r n a l o f P h o t o g r a m m e t r y a n d R e m o t e S e n s i n g186(2022)83–101
Fig. 3. Schematic of the methodological framework.
Then, the coordinates of pixels (row and column locations) of the 3.7. Field dynamics analysis from 1988 to 2020
thresholded NDVI map were obtained and used as input to the DBSCAN
clustering (Steps 4–6). After that, a pre-trained CNN (Section 3.2.2) The 2018-trained framework was used to identify and delineate the
model was applied to identify the shape of field objects (clusters) ob- fields in the study region for each year from 1988 to 2020. Firstly, the
tained from DBSCAN (Step 7). Spectral clustering was applied to re- number of circular and fan-shaped fields for each year was counted. We
cluster the objects identified as non-CPFs or objects consisting of mul- did not count the number of non-CPFs as the 30 m resolution imagery
tiple fields (Step 8). After running five iterations of CNN predictions and failed to present the field edge for non-CPFs, especially for tree planta-
spectral clustering, each pixel will have two types of label, i.e., the CNN tions, resulting in merged plantation fields. Then, the acreage of each
label (indicating the shape of the field that a pixel belonged to) and the field was obtained by the sum of areas corresponding to the pixels. Pixels
cluster label (pixels sharing the same cluster label forming a field). forming a CPF with an NDVI value of less than 0.25 were excluded from
However, tree crop plantations present lower annual maximum NDVI acreage counting. This filtering was conducted as some of the CPFs
values, which could easily be excluded by the multiple iterations represented donut shapes with no crops grown in the center of the field.
described above. To address this, a non-CPF annual maximum NDVI The polygon created in the framework covered all the pixels of a CPF

described above. To address this, a non-CPF annual maximum NDVI The polygon created in the framework covered all the pixels of a CPF
map was created by excluding the pixels identified as CPFs and objects including those with no crops grown. These pixels were excluded when
consisting of multiple fields (Step 10). Then the non-CPF annual calculating the acreage of a CPF. Thirdly, the delineated fields for every
maximum NDVI map was smoothed using a 5 ×5 pixels moving window two consecutive years were compared. Herein, if more than 60% of
to remove noise. After that, Steps 3 to 8 were repeated on the denoised pixels forming a CPF observed in one year were duplicated with pixels
non-CPF annual maximal NDVI map (starting from thresholding NDVI- forming a CPF observed in the year after, the two CPFs were defined as a
thresh =0.15). The pre-trained RF model (Section 3.4.2) was then applied duplicated field. Then, the relative bias of field acreage of the duplicated
to further classify non-CPF crops as either tree crop plantations or non- fields was calculated, which was defined as bias=(Aaf(cid:0) Abf)/Aaf, where
woody plants (Steps 12 – 13). The final outputs of the framework were af takes its value from [1989, 1990, 1991, …, 2020], bf =af (cid:0) 1, and Aaf
polygons covering individual fields (delineation result) and field shape and Abf indicated the acreage of a duplicated CPF observed in years bf
maps showing if a field represented a single circular CPF; a single fan- and af. A field was defined as a “duplicated field” if the intersection of
shaped CPF; non-CPFs, i.e. tree crop plantations or other non-woody the field acreage in two consecutive years (af and bf) was ≥0.6 Aaf or 0.6
crops; or merged fields. The parameter settings for the framework are Abf. Based on the duplicated fields, we also identified fields that were
summarized in Table S1. observed in year af but were not observed in year bf, and vice versus. By

summarized in Table S1. observed in year af but were not observed in year bf, and vice versus. By
doing so, the field dynamics were quantified on a yearly basis.
90

T. Li et al. I S P R S J o u r n a l o f P h o t o g r a m m e t r y a n d R e m o t e S e n s i n g186(2022)83–101
Moreover, the field expansion and contraction maps were obtained by 4. Results
the earliest and latest (before 2020) detection year of a pixel that formed
a field. Finally, a CPF was defined as active if the median of annual 4.1. Evaluation of the framework
maximum NDVI pixel values forming the field exceeded 0.35. For a non-
CPF pixel, it was identified as active as long as it was detected. The As can be seen from Fig. 4, the field delineation maps indicate that
number of years that a CPF was detected as active was counted as the framework performed well at detecting the fields using Landsat-8
relative activity of the fields representing the number of years out of the (2018) and Landsat-5 (2000) imagery. In 2018, 97.4% of the 4,009
time series that the field was in production. CPFs from the ground truth map were delineated correctly (i.e., pro-
ducer’s accuracy), while 98.0% of the 3,983 framework-delineated CPFs
were correctly present on the ground truth map (i.e., user’s accuracy)
Fig. 4. Maximum annual NDVI maps and associated validation results of field detection for both 2018 and 2000, highlighting correctly detected fields and different
types of errors. The framework was trained using data from the four sampling regions in 2018 (grey box), with the machine learning model then applied to delineate
fields across the rest of the region in 2018 and for the entire region of 2000. Center-pivot fields (CPFs) represented circular and fan-shaped fields, while non-CPFs
represented the union of tree crop plantations and other non-woody crops.
91

T. Li et al. I S P R S J o u r n a l o f P h o t o g r a m m e t r y a n d R e m o t e S e n s i n g186(2022)83–101
Table 2 ground truth map in 2018 were not detected by the framework, ac-
The accuracy for field detection using an object-basis for center-pivot fields counting for 15.2% of the identification errors of CPFs. This type of error
(CPFs) in 2018 and 2000. CPFs represented circular (Circle) and fan-shaped mainly occurred to small CPFs, CPFs with low NDVI values (Fig. 5b), and
(Fan) fields. when small CPFs were closely surrounded by large CPFs (Fig. 5g, some
Ground Truth pixels belonging to smaller CPFs were clustered to the surrounding large
CPFs, resulting in the small CPFs being misidentified as non-CPFs).
2018 2000
Omission errors were mainly caused by 14.5% of the non-CPF pixels
Circle Fan Circle Fan
from the ground truth map not being mapped by the framework, which
Circle 3,636 33 1,626 18
Framework-delineated map Fan 22 268 7 106 accounted for 77.9% of the omission error. This was due to two main
reasons. First, non-CPFs consisting of more than 20 pixels on the ground
Total CPFs on ground truth map 4,009 1,776
truth map but containing less than 20 pixels on the framework-
Total CPFs on the framework-delineated 3,983 1,793
map delineated map were eliminated by the framework (Fig. 5a and b).
Merged fields on the framework- 1 0 The second reason was the exclusion of low pixels values of NDVI on the
delineated map framework-delineated map, which might result in (1) a non-CPF on the
CPFs not detected 16 3
ground truth map being over-segmented into several subparts each of
CPFs detected as non-CPFs 33 16
Non-CPFs detected as CPFs 23 36 which consisting of less than 20 pixels and thus being excluded by the
Producer’s accuracy 97.4% 97.5% framework, and (2) some non-CPFs, especially for young tree crop
User’s accuracy 98.0% 96.6% plantations (Fig. 5g) blended into the sandy background and were hence

Producer’s accuracy 97.4% 97.5% framework, and (2) some non-CPFs, especially for young tree crop
User’s accuracy 98.0% 96.6% plantations (Fig. 5g) blended into the sandy background and were hence
not identified by the framework. The primary error in the framework-
(Table 2). The producer’s and user’s accuracy for CPF detection in 2000 delineated map was due to the incorrect identification of non-CPF
pixels that did not exist on the ground truth map, which accounted for
was 97.5% and 96.6% (Table 3), respectively, which were similar ac-
72.4% of the commission errors. This was mainly due to the non-CPFs’
curacies to those in 2018. Training the machine learning framework on
detection procedure utilizing a value of 0.15 of NDVI to eliminate bare
2018 imagery and applying this to the imagery from 2000 suggested
soil background pixels, resulting in some background pixels surrounding
good multi-temporal stability of the framework for the same region
the non-CPFs (with NDVI exceeding 0.15) being identified as part of
(Fig. 4).
non-CPFs (pixels in pink color in Fig. 5h).
The main error for incorrect detection of CPFs in 2018 was due to
The non-CPF detection accuracies in 2000 were lower than those in
circular CPFs being identified as fan-shaped CPFs and vice versa, ac-
2018 (Tables 2 and 3), suggesting a limitation in applying the model
counting for 52.4% and 69.6% of the omission and commission errors of
trained in 2018 to other periods in terms of identifying non-CPFs. This
CPFs in 2018 (Table 2), respectively. CPFs being identified as non-CPFs
was because the non-CPFs in 2000 appeared more complex with more
accounted for 31.4% of omission errors, while non-CPFs being identified
within-field variation than those in 2018, as many crop fields in the
as CPFs accounted for 29.1% of the commission errors in 2018. Four
northwestern region were not irrigated by center-pivot systems in 2000.
main reasons were causing these two types of errors. The first was field

northwestern region were not irrigated by center-pivot systems in 2000.
main reasons were causing these two types of errors. The first was field
The 2018-trained framework was not familiar with such conditions,
size, with fields of less than 50 Landsat pixels precluding shape identi-
since the main samples representing the non-CPFs in the training dataset
fication at the 30 m spatial resolution (Fig. 5a and b). Heterogeneity in
were from plantations in 2018.
the NDVI values of pixels forming some of the CPFs was another cause.
Pixels with relatively low NDVI values (e.g., <=0.25) were excluded by A second validation step assessed the delineation accuracy of CPFs at
the framework, causing misrepresentation of circular/fan-shaped fields
the pixel level. The median values of Sover, Sunder, Sunion, and IoU errors
by the remaining pixels >0.25, and were thus incorrectly identified were 1.5% (1.7%), 1.0% (0.5%), 1.4% (1.6%), and 3.5% (3.7%) for 2018
and 2000 (in brackets), respectively (Fig. 6a), which indicated high
(Fig. 5e). The third cause was the over-segmentation of fields. In the
overlap between the estimated fields and ground truth fields. The me-
example ofFig. 5d, a circular field was divided into, and subsequently
identified as, two fan-shaped fields. Such over-segmentation error
dian and the upper quartile of Sover was slightly higher than Sunder,
suggesting that the framework produced slightly more over-
occurred for some fields due to the irrigation sprinkler system forming a
segmentation errors than under-segmentation errors for both years.
line through the field with low NDVI values and high NDVI gradients,
The R2 of the acreage of individual fields between the CPFs on the
which resulted in fields being partitioned into multiple clusters. The
framework-delineated map and the ground truth map was 0.99 and 0.98
fourth cause occurred due to under-segmentation, where multiple
for 2018 and 2000, respectively (Fig. 6b and c). The negative rMBD

framework-delineated map and the ground truth map was 0.99 and 0.98
fourth cause occurred due to under-segmentation, where multiple
for 2018 and 2000, respectively (Fig. 6b and c). The negative rMBD
merged fields were incorrectly identified as fan-shaped fields or non-
values for both years indicated that the acreage of CPFs was generally
CPFs (Fig. 5f). This type of error was mainly due to overlapping edge
under-estimated. This was due to the elimination of pixels with NDVI
pixels between neighboring fields, which reduced the gradient of NDVI
values higher than 0.25 (5% lowest NDVI value in each cluster) in the
values in the adjoining area (as opposed to CPF edge pixels adjoining
repeated DBSCAN and spectral clustering procedures, which were
bare ground) and hence prevented field separation. The over-
mainly pixels along the field boundary. The pixel-level assessment also
segmentation and under-segmentation errors could also lead to CPFs
suggested that the model trained using 2018 data performed well in
being identified as non-CPFs, e.g. if parts of a field or merged fields
2000 in the same region for delineating the extent of individual CPFs.
appeared non-circular or non-fan-shaped. In addition, 16 of CPFs on the
Table 3
The accuracy for field detection using a pixel-basis for non-center-pivot fields (non-CPFs) in 2018 and 2000.
2018 2000
Correctly detected non-CPF pixels 60,352 34,213
Total non-CPF pixels on ground truth map 74,115 48,081
Total non-CPF pixels on the framework-delineated map 70,641 41,721
Non-CPF pixels not detected 10,718 10,709
Non-CPF pixels detected as CPFs 3,045 3,519
Non-CPF pixels not present on ground truth map but present on framework delineated map 7,451 5,669
Producer’s accuracy 81.4% 71.2%
User’s accuracy 85.4% 82.0%
92

T. Li et al. I S P R S J o u r n a l o f P h o t o g r a m m e t r y a n d R e m o t e S e n s i n g186(2022)83–101
Fig. 5. Examples of field identification errors showing (a) small circular center-pivot fields (CPFs) being identified as fan-shaped CPFs and vice versa, and non-CPFs
present in the ground truth map not being detected by the framework; (b) CPFs and non-CPFs present in the ground truth map but not detected by the framework; (c)
merged fields and a fan-shaped CPF detected as a circular CPF; (d) a circular CPF being identified as fan-shaped CPF due to over-segmentation; (e) a circular CPF
being identified as a fan-shaped CPF due to elimination of pixels with low NDVI values; (f) two circular CPFs being identified as a fan-shaped CPF; (g) three small
circular CPFs and some non-CPFs with low NDVI values not detected by the framework; and (h) non-CPF pixels only on the framework-delineated map or only on the
ground truth map. CPFs represented circular and fan-shaped center-pivot fields, while non-CPFs represented the union of tree crop plantations and other non-
woody crops.
4.2. Mapping agricultural field dynamics from 1988 to 2020 suggested (1) the dominant CPFs had an acreage ranging from 40 to 60
ha before 2000 and after 2009; (2) from 2000, small CPFs of less than 30
The framework trained using data from 2018 was applied to delin- ha started to appear; and (3) from 2001 to 2008, the dominant CPF
eate the fields from 1988 to 2020 using Landsat data (Table 1). There acreage ranged from 60 to 80 ha. Herein, if more than 60% of pixels
were 45 CPFs detected in 1988, accounting for approximately 20 km2 of forming a CPF observed in one year were also mapped as active in the
irrigated acreage. A sharp increase was observed in 1993 when 410 year after, the two CPFs were defined as a duplicated field. The acreage
(230 km2) additional CPFs were detected compared to 1992 (Fig. 7a and bias of duplicated fields that were detected in two consecutive years

(230 km2) additional CPFs were detected compared to 1992 (Fig. 7a and bias of duplicated fields that were detected in two consecutive years
d). The sharpest increase of CPFs occurred in 2002 with approximately (Fig. 7e) suggested that until 2010, most of the duplicated CPFs
660 new CPFs detected compared to 2001, resulting in an additional increased in size compared to the previous year. Since 2011, the
370 km2 of irrigated center-pivot systems (Fig. 7d). A significant duplicated fields were generally shrinking, especially for duplicated
decrease of CPFs was observed in 2009 (Fig. 7a and d) with the removal CPFs detected in 2019 and 2020, when their field diameter was reduced
of 517 (374 km2) CPFs compared to 2008. Although around 310 CPFs to cover an acreage of about 10% less.
were newly created in 2009 compared to 2008, this was the first time Non-CPFs, representing a tree crop plantation or other non-woody
since 1988 that the overall acreage of CPFs decreased by any significant plant crops, were mainly present in the northwestern region of the
amount (a reduction of approximately 195 km2). However, from 2010 to study site, with the area increasing from 1988 to 1992 from around 68
2016 the area of CPFs increased every year, reaching its largest extent in km2 to 145 km2 (Fig. 7b). In 1993, the non-woody non-CPFs started to
2016, with around 5,080 CPFs covering 2,368 km2. Since 2016, the decrease. On the other hand, a significant increase in tree crop planta-
number of CPFs started to decrease, with the largest observed reduction tions was observed from 1994 (Fig. 7b). The tree crop plantation acreage
occurring in 2020. By 2020, the number of CPFs had dropped to around displayed an increasing trend until 2020. The minor fluctuations of the
3,700, covering an area of 1,581 km2 (Fig. 7a). tree crop plantation acreage before 2010 are likely caused by errors

3,700, covering an area of 1,581 km2 (Fig. 7a). tree crop plantation acreage before 2010 are likely caused by errors
The median values of CPF acreage ranged from 50 to 60 ha (Fig. 7c), introduced when identifying the non-CPF pixels, especially when the
which was consistent with the length of the rotating center-pivot sys- trees were young with tree crop pixels appearing with low NDVI values,
tems covering 800 m in diameter. The width of the violins in Fig. 7c which may the discrimination from background pixels challenging.
indicated the count of the fields in each acreage range. The result However, such errors will decrease as the trees grow. The largest acreage
93

T. Li et al. I S P R S J o u r n a l o f P h o t o g r a m m e t r y a n d R e m o t e S e n s i n g186(2022)83–101
Fig. 6. Delineation accuracy measures for 2018 and 2000 showing: (a) a violin plot of Sover, Sunder, Sunion, and IoU error values; and (b) the scatterplots of the field
acreage obtained from the ground truth and framework-estimated maps (n =3,994 and 1,773) for the years 2018 and 2000, respectively. The scatterplots were based
on the center-pivot fields (CPFs) from the ground truth maps, but excluding the CPFs that were not detected by the framework. In (a), Sover and Sunder indicate the
over-segmentation and under-segmentation errors. Sunion indicates an index computed from the root mean square of Sunder and Sover. IoU error indicates the inter-
section over union error. In (b) and (c), R2 is the coefficient of determination. MAD indicates the mean absolute bias deviation, with relative MAD subsequently
shown in the parentheses. rMBD indicates the relative mean bias deviation. The red lines indicate x =y.
of tree crop plantations was observed in 2020 and covered an area of 51.6%. The field contraction was mainly observed in the central and
approximately 172 km2. northern parts of the study site, where the fields were primarily created
To better understand the field dynamics temporally and spatially, the before 2010 (Figs. 8 and 9). A few fields created after 2010 in the
field expansion and contraction maps were produced by the earliest northeastern region were removed by 2020 (Figs. 8 and 9). The hollow
detection year and latest detection year (before 2020) of pixels forming circles in Fig. 9 represent the footprint of shrunk fields being observed
a field. The highest expansion rate of fields was observed for the periods after 2010, where the length of the center-pivot sprinkling system was
between 1990 and 1995 and 2000–2005, resulting in approximately shortened, causing the field diameter to be reduced. These pixels were

between 1990 and 1995 and 2000–2005, resulting in approximately shortened, causing the field diameter to be reduced. These pixels were
708 km2 and 1,070 km2 of added acreage (Fig. 8). CPFs contributed to the main reason behind the negative bias of duplicated field acreage
the majority of the expanding acreage, occupying 82.8% and 95.4% for after 2010 (Fig. 7e).
the two periods, respectively. The increase of CPFs resulted in a higher A map was produced to understand the number of years within the
density of CPFs within the central and southern parts of the region time series that a field was active (Fig. 10). A CPF was defined as active
(green and pink color inFig. 8). The expansion of non-CPFs was pri- within a year if the median of the annual maximum NDVI pixel values
marily observed in the northwestern region before 1995. After 2005, forming the field exceeded 0.35. A non-CPF was defined as active as long
additional CPFs mainly occurred in the northeastern area of Al Jawf as it was detected. Then the sum of years that a pixel belonged to an
(Fig. 8). Contraction of the field acreage occurred mainly after 2015, active field was calculated as the active index map. As can be seen, most
resulting in a reduction of approximately 1,181 km2 of acreage by the fields were active for a period of 25–30 years (approximate 1,385 km2),
end of 2020 (Fig. 9), with the removal of CPFs in 2020 contributing followed by 15–20 years (approximate 1,180 km2). Many of the CPFs in
94

T. Li et al. I S P R S J o u r n a l o f P h o t o g r a m m e t r y a n d R e m o t e S e n s i n g186(2022)83–101
Fig. 7. Agricultural field dynamics of the Al Jawf region from 1988 to 2020 showing: (a) the acreage (left y-axis) and number (right y-axis) of center-pivot fields
(CPFs), with blue bars indicating additional fan-shaped CPF; (b) the acreage of non-CPFs, i.e. tree crop plantations and other non-woody crops classified by the
random forest model; (c) violin plots (with quartiles asdashedlines) showing the distribution of CPF acreage for each year; (d) the newly added/removed acreage
(left y-axis) and number (right y-axis) of CPFs compared to the previous year; and (e) the relative bias of field acreage of the duplicated fields being detected for two
consecutive years, which was defined as bias=(Aaf(cid:0) Abf)/Aaf, where af takes its value from [1989, 1990, 1991, …, 2020], bf =af (cid:0) 1, and Aaf and Abf indicated the
acreage of a duplicated CPF observed in year bf and af. A field was defined as a “duplicated field” if the intersection of the field acreage in consecutive two years (af
and bf) was ≥0.6 Aaf or 0.6 Abf.
the central to the southern part of Al Jawf were active for more than 15 5. Discussion
consecutive years. The CPFs in the northern region were generally
mapped as being active for less than 15 years, as they were created after The delineation of individual field maps is fundamental to a variety
2005 (Fig. 8). The non-CPFs occupied by non-woody crops were active of studies, including dynamic field modeling (e.g., crop type classifica-
for less than 15 years, which was caused by the elimination of non- tion and crop yield forecasting) (Cai et al. 2018), evapotranspiration
woody crop fields that first appeared from 1993 to the early 2000s modeling (Aragon et al. 2018), water resource management (Lo´pez
(Fig. 7b). Valencia et al. 2020), as well as in driving and delivering policy and

(Fig. 7b). Valencia et al. 2020), as well as in driving and delivering policy and
management efforts. The results presented herein advance upon a
95

T. Li et al. I S P R S J o u r n a l o f P h o t o g r a m m e t r y a n d R e m o t e S e n s i n g186(2022)83–101
Fig. 8. Agricultural field expansion map. The map was generated by identifying the year that each pixel within an agricultural field was first detected as being active
by the machine learning framework. The bar plot at the top represents the field acreage, calculated from the point of the first detection of each field in successive 5-
year periods.
number of earlier machine-learning applications in terms of delineating 4,762 objects and evaluated against 650 objects. In our study, the
individual CPFs and identifying the field shape, i.e., circular, fan shape framework was trained using 4,287 objects and evaluated against 5,785
or other, providing additional insights into field dynamics and charac- CPFs collected across different years. We derived our collected training
terization. While it is not always meaningful to intercompare results data by labeling the shape of the field candidates and identifying if it
from studies that have used different data or are based in different lo- consisted of multiple fields, which was an easy and fast process. The
cations, a broad comparison can provide some insight into relative studies by de Albuquerque et al. (2021a) and de Albuquerque et al.
performance. In this case, our method showed an advantage in delin- (2021b), which mapped individual CPFs using Mask-RCNN across the
eating individual fields relative to studies by Zhang et al. (2018) and same region in the study conducted by Carvalho et al. (2021), showed
Tang et al. (2021b), which identified the location of CPFs without seg- similar limitations in terms of requiring CPF polygons in the training
menting the extent of individual CPFs, or studies by Graf et al. (2020), stage, which was time-consuming to collect for regions where such data
Saraiva et al. (2020), and de Albuquerque et al. (2020), which merged were not available.

Saraiva et al. (2020), and de Albuquerque et al. (2020), which merged were not available.
all CPFs as a single layer map. Carvalho et al. (2021) proposed an The method proposed by Tang et al. (2021a) is perhaps the most
innovative method using Mask-RCNN to delineate CPFs for three regions similar to our approach. Three modules were implemented in a stepwise
located in the Cerrado biome, Central Brazil, using seven spectral bands manner, including PVANET, GoogleLeNet, and the Hough transform.
of Landsat-8 images. The study regions consisted of around 3,730 CPFs PVANET was employed first to detect CPF candidates. In this stage, the
in 2016. Ground truth data were created based on surveyed vector CPFs were annotated by rectangular boxes in the training dataset.
polygons masking individual CPFs. Their method was trained using GoogleLeNet was then applied to identify the false detections by
96

T. Li et al. I S P R S J o u r n a l o f P h o t o g r a m m e t r y a n d R e m o t e S e n s i n g186(2022)83–101
Fig. 9. Agricultural field contraction map. The map was generated by identifying the year that each pixel within an agricultural field was last detected as being active
before 2020 by the machine learning framework. The bar plot at the top represents the field acreage of removed fields for different 5-year periods.
PVANET, with the images labeled to present whether they consisted of distinct approaches performed in different locations and under different
CPFs or not. The Hough transform was subsequently applied to delineate local conditions. Future efforts may focus on performing a thorough
the shape of CPFs by identifying the center point and radius of a CPF. intercomparison of machine learning approaches for mapping agricul-
The framework was applied to map CPFs in Mato Grosso in Brazil using a tural fields in a range of landscapes. Here, we also present the first
true color image of Sentinel-2 and achieved 95% and 95.5% user’s and analysis of center-pivot dynamics extending over a period of three de-
producer’s accuracies, respectively. Our method performed slightly cades across a key agricultural region of Saudi Arabia. Future work will
better than this framework, i.e., 97.4% and 98.8% for user’s and pro- also explore the implementation of the framework to the entirety of
ducer’s accuracies, respectively, and managed to delineate small CPFs Saudi Arabia to provide a deeper understanding of multi-temporal
with radii shorter than 200 m and fan-shaped fields. Overall, compared agricultural dynamics in relation to policy initiatives.
to previous related studies, the proposed method herein showed ad-
vantages of delineating individual CPFs. For instance, our method pro- 5.1. The benefit of a hybrid framework
duced high mapping accuracies when evaluated against large datasets

vantages of delineating individual CPFs. For instance, our method pro- 5.1. The benefit of a hybrid framework
duced high mapping accuracies when evaluated against large datasets
across different years: even when being trained with limited data. In In our hybrid framework, each of the four machine learning algo-
addition, observations in the form of field shape and whether an object rithms performed its own function. DBSCAN clustering wasprimarily
consisted of multiple fields enabled easy and quick generation of used forsegmenting those fields that were geographically separated and
training data. Importantly, our study presents the first attempt to showed good performance when dealing with this large geospatial
discriminate between complete CPFs (circular CPFs), incomplete CPFs dataset. However, it was less successful at segmenting neighboring fields
(fan-shaped CPFs), and non-CPFs representing rectangular shapes (tree with adjoining edges. In these cases, spectral clustering proved to be
plantation). However, as already noted, it is challenging to intercompare useful but also presented limitations in terms of the requirement for
97

T. Li et al. I S P R S J o u r n a l o f P h o t o g r a m m e t r y a n d R e m o t e S e n s i n g186(2022)83–101
Fig. 10. Map showing the number of years that a field was active between 1988 and 2020. A field was defined as active within a year if the median of the annual
maximum NDVI (normalized differential vegetation index) pixel values forming the field exceeded 0.35. The bar plot at the top shows the acreage of active fields in
relation to the number of years being active.
setting the number of clusters and a reduced ability to deal with this shaped CPFs in their center-pivot detection study. CNN classification
large dataset requiring significantly longer run time. It took less than a is capable of identifying the shape of the field and if a field object
second on a desktop computer for spectral clustering to segment an consists of multiple fields.
input field object consisting of three or four CPFs. However, it could take CPFs were primarily covered by non-woody crops, while the non-
several minutes if the input field object consisted of more than ten CPFs. CPFs might consist of tree crops or non-woody crops, which could suc-
Using field objects that werepreliminarilysegmented by DBSCAN as cessfully be discriminated by an RF classifier. However, the accuracy of
input to the spectral clustering considerably reduced the runtime. RF classification was only evaluated using data from sampling region 4
Indeed, the increased computational complexity of spectral clustering (Fig. 1). We were unable to evaluate the performance of the RF model
can be a key limitation for employing the technique (Miyahara et al. using the same dataset as evaluating the delineation results (as shown in
2014). Fig. 4) since no in situ crop type information was provided. The
The minimal value of the number of clusters is two when running dependence on ground truth data was one of the most significant limi-

The minimal value of the number of clusters is two when running dependence on ground truth data was one of the most significant limi-
spectral clustering. As such, a procedure was required to identify if a tations of applying any supervised learning approaches in this research.
field object (obtained from DBSCAN) consisted of a single field or not.
Spectral clustering should only be run to segment field objects consisting
5.2. Socio-political drivers of field dynamics
of multiple fields. In addition, the irregular shape of fields has proven to
be a challenge for identifying and delineating CPFs (Saraiva et al. 2020;
The observed increases in center-pivot fields since the 1980s (Fig. 7a
Zhang et al. 2018). For example, Mekhalfi et al. (2021) excluded fan-
and b) were largely driven by policies initiated in the early 1970s to
98

T. Li et al. I S P R S J o u r n a l o f P h o t o g r a m m e t r y a n d R e m o t e S e n s i n g186(2022)83–101
boost agricultural production and achieve a measure of food self- delineation of fields for the year 2000, allowing subsequent application
sufficiency (Frenken 2009; Ouda 2014). Likewise, the significant field of this approach across the time series of satellite data. Through this
acreage reduction observed in 2009 (Fig. 7a and d) was a consequence of analysis, new insights into the number and acreage of fields, along with
policy initiatives in 2008, which banned the planting of crops such as their increase or decrease on a yearly basis, the expansion and
wheat and provided incentives to switch to the cultivation of high-value contraction of individual fields through time, and the number of years
crops such as fruit (Frenken 2009; Ouda 2014). The most recent an individual field was active, were obtained. These results provide
decrease in field acreage that was observed after 2018 was a manifes- additional insight into important agricultural informatics that may assist
tation of new regulations in Saudi Arabia to reduce water use in the related studies such as crop type discrimination, yield estimation, water
agricultural sector due to the current levels of unsustainable use of non- consumption, and other food and water security-related concerns. The
renewable water resources (Belgiu and Csillik 2018). Based on our work, machine learning algorithms used in this framework provided a largely
it is predictable that the crop water consumption in Al Jawf since 2018 automated, computationally efficient, and accurate solution to field
would have significantly decreased due to the removal of CPFs. identification and delineation. Field dynamics obtained from the 33-
Although the acreage of tree plantations keeps increasing, there is a year Landsat time-series provided a temporal exploration of agricul-

Although the acreage of tree plantations keeps increasing, there is a year Landsat time-series provided a temporal exploration of agricul-
significant net reduction in agricultural acreage. Our results may sup- tural development in the Al Jawf region, and clearly reflected how
port decision-makers in determining if implemented policy initiatives various policy initiatives affected field management and production
have the intended outcome. practices. Future work should focus on exploring potential improve-
ments to the accuracy of the framework. These may be achieved by: (1)
5.3. Potential improvements to the framework exploring additional spectral bands and vegetation indices as input; (2)
developing a self-learning procedure to find the optimal model param-
Although our results achieved high mapping accuracies, there may eters suited for CPFs with various diameters; and (3) adapting the
be potential to further improve the processing framework to be adapted framework to identify field types in environments that differ from those
for other regions. Generally, for machine learning approaches to make a studied herein. By developing and applying this novel temporal analysis
sustained impact on delivering new and insightful agricultural infor- on high-resolution satellite data, an improved understanding of the
matics, the transferability of developed approaches needs to be thor- ability of machine learning methods in detecting fields with different
oughly explored. For instance, the soil background can make it difficult shapes and delineating the extent of the fields has been gained.
to mask tree crop plantation pixels (Fig. 5h), especially when the tree
crops are young. Alternative indices considering the soil spectra such as CRediT authorship contribution statement
the Soil Adjusted Vegetation Index may offer a potential solution (Belgiu

crops are young. Alternative indices considering the soil spectra such as CRediT authorship contribution statement
the Soil Adjusted Vegetation Index may offer a potential solution (Belgiu
and Csillik 2018; Napoli et al. 2018) and should be explored in future Ting Li: Conceptualization, Methodology, Validation, Visualization,
work.The framework parameters were initialized based on the domi- Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Kasper Johansen:
nant size of the center-pivot fields (800 m in diameter), but this might Methodology, Validation, Writing – review & editing. Matthew F.
introduce problems when identifying small fields, such as those in the McCabe: Conceptualization, Supervision, Writing – review & editing.
northwestern region of the study site (Fig. 5a and b). A self-learning
procedure, such as gradient descent (Waldner and Diakogiannis 2020),
may be useful to update the parameters automatically during the Declaration of Competing Interest
learning process. It is also feasible to divide the large satellite image
scene into several subsets and adjust the framework parameters based The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
on the field condition that best fit each of the subsets, i.e. dominant interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
shape and size of fields. This may shorten the runtime of the framework, the work reported in this paper.
especially when applying the framework to finer scale satellite data such
as Sentinel-2 or PlanetScope, as the processing can be employed on in- Acknowledgments
dependent subsets and in parallel by a machine. A reduction of ‘over-
segmentation errors caused by spectral clustering is an area where Research reported in this publication was supported by the King
further research is also justified (Nadler and Galun 2007), e.g. by Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST).
training a CNN model to count the number of fields in a given image.

further research is also justified (Nadler and Galun 2007), e.g. by Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST).
training a CNN model to count the number of fields in a given image.
Appendix A. Supplementary material
6. Conclusions
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.
A three-decades long spatial and temporal analysis of center-pivot org/10.1016/j.isprsjprs.2022.02.002.
fields and tree plantations was performed across a major agricultural
region of Saudi Arabia. Based on a unique processing workflow that
integrated four machine learning algorithms and exploited a 33-year
time-series of Landsat imagery, the approach was used to characterize Al-Rumkhani, Y.A., Din, S.U., 2004. Use of remote sensing for irrigation scheduling in
agricultural field delineation and their multi-temporal dynamics. Re- arid lands of Saudi Arabia. J. Indian Soc. Remote Sens. 32 (2), 225–233.
Aragon, B., Houborg, R., Tu, K., Fisher, J.B., McCabe, M., 2018. CubeSats enable high
sults established the high accuracy of the framework for identifying a
spatiotemporal retrievals of crop-water use for precision agriculture. Remote Sensing
variety of agricultural field shapes, i.e., circular and fan shape (or 10 (12), 1867. https://doi.org/10.3390/rs10121867.
neither) and their size, as well as for delineating individual center-pivot Baatz, M., 2000. Multi resolution Segmentation: an optimum approach for high quality
multi scale image segmentation. In: Beutrage zum AGIT-Symposium. Salzburg,
fields. Using imagery from 2018, individual center-pivot fields were
Heidelberg, 2000, pp. 12–23.
mapped and their shapes classified, resulting in a 97.4% producer’s and Bauder, T.A., 2004. Center pivot irrigation in Colorado as mapped by landsat imagery.
98.0% user’s accuracy on an object basis. The over-segmentation and Technical bul.(Colorado Agricultural Experiment Station); TB-04-4.

98.0% user’s accuracy on an object basis. The over-segmentation and Technical bul.(Colorado Agricultural Experiment Station); TB-04-4.
under-segmentation errors were less than 1.5% and the coefficient of Belgiu, M., Csillik, O., 2018. Sentinel-2 cropland mapping using pixel-based and object-
based time-weighted dynamic time warping analysis. Remote Sens. Environ. 204,
determination for the field acreage between the delineated center-pivot 509–523.
fields and ground truth data was 0.99. In terms of identifying non- Belgiu, M., Dra˘gut¸, L., 2016. Random forest in remote sensing: a review of applications
center-pivot fields, the method achieved 81.4% producer’s and 85.4% and future directions. ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens. 114, 24–31.
Bleau, A., Leon, L.J., 2000. Watershed-based segmentation and region merging. Comput.
user’s accuracy on a pixel basis. A subsequent model trained on 2018 Vis. Image Underst. 77 (3), 317–370.
data showed high stability when applied to the detection and Breiman, L., 2001. Random forests. Mach. Learn. 45, 5–32.
99

T. Li et al. I S P R S J o u r n a l o f P h o t o g r a m m e t r y a n d R e m o t e S e n s i n g186(2022)83–101
Cai, Y., Guan, K., Peng, J., Wang, S., Seifert, C., Wardlow, B., Li, Z., 2018. A high- agriculture at different nomenclature levels using multisource data (simulated
performance and in-season classification system of field-level crop types using time- Sentinel-2 time series, VHRS and DEM). Remote Sensing 9 (3), 259. https://doi.org/
series Landsat data and a machine learning approach. Remote Sens. Environ. 210, 10.3390/rs9030259.
35–47. LeCun, Y., Boser, B., Denker, J.S., Henderson, D., Howard, R.E., Hubbard, W., Jackel, L.
Calinski, T., Harabasz, J., 1974. A dendrite method for cluster analysis. Commun. Stat.- D., 1989. Backpropagation applied to handwritten zip code recognition. Neural
Theory Methods 3 (1), 1–27. Comput. 1 (4), 541–551.
Campello, R.J., Moulavi, D., Sander, J., 2013. Density-based clustering based on Li, Q., Wang, C., Zhang, B., Lu, L., 2015. Object-based crop classification with Landsat-
hierarchical density estimates. In: Pacific-Asia Conference On Knowledge Discovery MODIS enhanced time-series data. Remote Sensing 7 (12), 16091–16107.
And Data Mining. Springer, pp. 160–172. Litts, T., Russell, H., Thomas, A., Welch, R., 2001. Mapping irrigated lands in the ACF
Canny, J., 1986. A computational approach to edge detection. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. river basin. In: Georgia Institute of Technology.
Machine Intell. 679–698. Long, J., Shelhamer, E., Darrell, T., 2015. Fully convolutional networks for semantic
Carvalho, O.L.F.d., de Carvalho Júnior, O.A., Albuquerque, A.O.d., Bem, P.P.d., Silva, C. segmentation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
R., Ferreira, P.H.G., Moura, R.D.S.d., Gomes, R.A.T., Guimara˜es, R.F., Borges, D.L., pattern recognition, pp. 3431–3440.

R., Ferreira, P.H.G., Moura, R.D.S.d., Gomes, R.A.T., Guimara˜es, R.F., Borges, D.L., pattern recognition, pp. 3431–3440.
2021. Instance segmentation for large, multi-channel remote sensing imagery using Lo´pez Valencia, O.M., Johansen, K., Arago´n Solorio, B.J.L., Li, T., Houborg, R.,
Mask-RCNN and a Mosaicking approach. Remote Sensing 13 (1), 39. https://doi. Malbeteau, Y., AlMashharawi, S., Altaf, M.U., Fallatah, E.M., Dasari, H.P., Hoteit, I.,
org/10.3390/rs13010039. McCabe, M.F., 2020. Mapping groundwater abstractions from irrigated agriculture:
Clinton, N., Holt, A., Scarborough, J., Yan, L.i., Gong, P., 2010. Accuracy assessment big data, inverse modeling, and a satellite–model fusion approach. Hydrol. Earth
measures for object-based image segmentation goodness. Photogramm. Eng. Remote Syst. Sci. 24 (11), 5251–5277.
Sens 76 (3), 289–299. Masoud, K.M., Persello, C., Tolpekin, V.A., 2020. Delineation of agricultural field
de Albuquerque, A.O., de Carvalho Júnior, O.A., Carvalho, O.L.F.d., de Bem, P.P., boundaries from Sentinel-2 images using a novel super-resolution contour detector
Ferreira, P.H.G., de Moura, R.D.S., Silva, C.R., Trancoso Gomes, R.A., Fontes based on fully convolutional networks. Remote Sensing 12 (1), 59. https://doi.org/
Guimara˜es, R., 2020. Deep semantic segmentation of center pivot irrigation systems 10.3390/rs12010059.
from remotely sensed data. Remote Sensing 12 (13), 2159. https://doi.org/10.3390/ McInnes, L., Healy, J., Astels, S., 2017. hdbscan: Hierarchical density based clustering.
rs12132159. J. Open Source Softw. 2 (11), 205. https://doi.org/10.21105/joss10.21105/
de Albuquerque, A.O., de Carvalho, O.L.F., e Silva, C.R., de Bem, P.P., Trancoso joss.00205.
Gomes, R.A., Borges, D.L., Guimar˜aes, R.F., Pimentel, C.M.M., de Carvalho Júnior, O. Mekhalfi, M.L., Nicolo`, C., Bazi, Y., Al Rahhal, M.M., Al Maghayreh, E., 2021. Detecting

Gomes, R.A., Borges, D.L., Guimar˜aes, R.F., Pimentel, C.M.M., de Carvalho Júnior, O. Mekhalfi, M.L., Nicolo`, C., Bazi, Y., Al Rahhal, M.M., Al Maghayreh, E., 2021. Detecting
A., 2021a. Instance segmentation of center pivot irrigation systems using multi- crop circles in google earth images with mask R-CNN and YOLOv3. Appl. Sci. 11 (5),
temporal SENTINEL-1 SAR images. Remote Sens. Appl.: Soc. Environ. 23, 100537. 2238. https://doi.org/10.3390/app11052238.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rsase.2021.100537. Melton, F.S., Johnson, L.F., Lund, C.P., Pierce, L.L., Michaelis, A.R., Hiatt, S.H.,
de Albuquerque, A.O., de Carvalho, O.L.F., Silva, C.R.e., Luiz, A.S., de Bem, P.P., Guzman, A., Adhikari, D.D., Purdy, A.J., Rosevelt, C., Votava, P., Trout, T.J.,
Gomes, R.A.T., Guimaraes, R.F., Junior, O.A.d.C., 2021b. Dealing with clouds and Temesgen, B., Frame, K., Sheffner, E.J., Nemani, R.R., 2012. Satellite irrigation
seasonal changes for center pivot irrigation systems detection using instance management support with the terrestrial observation and prediction system: A
segmentation in sentinel-2 time series. IEEE J. Sel. Top. Appl. Earth Obs. Remote framework for integration of satellite and surface observations to support
Sens. 14, 8447–8457. improvements in agricultural water resource management. IEEE J. Sel. Top. Appl.
Dhillon, I.S., Guan, Y., Kulis, B., 2004. Kernel k-means, spectral clustering and Earth Obs. Remote Sens. 5 (6), 1709–1721.
on Knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 551–556. Springer, pp. 111–126.
Duro, D.C., Franklin, S.E., Dub´e, M.G., 2012. A comparison of pixel-based and object- Miyahara, S., Komazaki, Y., Miyamoto, S., 2014. An algorithm combining spectral
based image analysis with selected machine learning algorithms for the classification clustering and DBSCAN for core points. Knowledge and Systems Engineering.
of agricultural landscapes using SPOT-5 HRG imagery. Remote Sens. Environ. 118, Springer, pp. 21–28.

of agricultural landscapes using SPOT-5 HRG imagery. Remote Sens. Environ. 118, Springer, pp. 21–28.
259–272. Mueller, M., Segl, K., Kaufmann, H., 2004. Edge-and region-based segmentation
Ester, M., Kriegel, H.-P., Sander, J., Xu, X., 1996. A density-based algorithm for technique for the extraction of large, man-made objects in high-resolution satellite
discovering clusters in large spatial databases with noise. In: Kdd, pp. 226–231. imagery. Pattern Recogn. 37 (8), 1619–1628.
Famiglietti, J.S., 2014. The global groundwater crisis. Nat. Clim. Change 4 (11), Nadler, B., Galun, M., 2007. Fundamental limitations of spectral clustering. In: Advances
945–948. in neural information processing systems, pp. 1017–1024.
Fao, 2013. Global map of irrigation areas - Saudi Arabia. Food and Agriculture Napoli, C., Wise, B., Wogan, D., Yaseen, L., 2018. Policy options for reducing water for
Organization of the United Nations, Rome. agriculture in Saudi Arabia. In: Assessing Global Water Megatrends. Springer,
Ferrara, R., Virdis, S.G.P., Ventura, A., Ghisu, T., Duce, P., Pellizzaro, G., 2018. An pp. 211–230.
automated approach for wood-leaf separation from terrestrial LIDAR point clouds Ng, A.Y., Jordan, M.I., Weiss, Y., 2002. On spectral clustering: Analysis and an algorithm.
using the density based clustering algorithm DBSCAN. Agric. For. Meteorol. 262, In: Advances in neural information processing systems, pp. 849–856.
434–444. Olson, D.L., Delen, D., 2008. Performance evaluation for predictive modeling. In:
Ferreira, E., Toledo, J.H.d., Dantas, A.A.A., Pereira, R.M., 2011. Cadastral maps of Advanced Data Mining Techniques. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg,
irrigated areas by center pivots in the State of Minas Gerais, using CBERS-2B/CCD pp. 137–147. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-76917-0_9.
satellite imaging. Engenharia Agrícola 31 (4), 771–780. Ouda, O.K.M., 2014. Impacts of agricultural policy on irrigation water demand: a case

satellite imaging. Engenharia Agrícola 31 (4), 771–780. Ouda, O.K.M., 2014. Impacts of agricultural policy on irrigation water demand: a case
Frenken, K., 2009. Irrigation in the Middle East region in figures AQUASTAT Survey- study of Saudi Arabia. Int. J. Water Resour. Dev. 30 (2), 282–292.
2008. Water Reports. Pastor, A.V., Palazzo, A., Havlik, P., Biemans, H., Wada, Y., Obersteiner, M., Kabat, P.,
Garcia-Garcia, A., Orts-Escolano, S., Oprea, S., Villena-Martinez, V., Martinez- Ludwig, F., 2019. The global nexus of food–trade–water sustaining environmental
Gonzalez, P., Garcia-Rodriguez, J., 2018. A survey on deep learning techniques for flows by 2050. Nat. Sustainability 2 (6), 499–507.
image and video semantic segmentation. Appl. Soft Comput. 70, 41–65. Pedregosa, F., Varoquaux, G., Gramfort, A., Michel, V., Thirion, B., Grisel, O.,
Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y., Courville, A., 2016. Deep Learning. MIT Press. Blondel, M., Prettenhofer, P., Weiss, R., Dubourg, V., 2011. Scikit-learn: machine
Graesser, J., Ramankutty, N., 2017. Detection of cropland field parcels from Landsat learning in Python. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 12, 2825–2830.
imagery. Remote Sens. Environ. 201, 165–180. Pen˜a, J., Guti´errez, P., Herva´s-Martínez, C., Six, J., Plant, R., Lo´pez-Granados, F., 2014.
Graf, L., Bach, H., Tiede, D., 2020. Semantic segmentation of sentinel-2 imagery for Object-based image classification of summer crops with machine learning methods.
mapping irrigation center pivots. Remote Sensing 12 (23), 3937. https://doi.org/ Remote Sensing 6 (6), 5019–5041.
10.3390/rs12233937. Persello, C., Tolpekin, V.A., Bergado, J.R., de By, R.A., 2019. Delineation of agricultural
GASTAT, 2018. Agricultural Area Cultivated and Production by Type of Crop, Statistical fields in smallholder farms from satellite images using fully convolutional networks
Yearbook of 2018. and combinatorial grouping. Remote Sens. Environ. 231, 111253. https://doi.org/

Yearbook of 2018. and combinatorial grouping. Remote Sens. Environ. 231, 111253. https://doi.org/
He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., Sun, J., 2015. Delving deep into rectifiers: Surpassing human- 10.1016/j.rse.2019.111253.
level performance on imagenet classification. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Phalke, A.R., O¨ zdog˘an, M., Thenkabail, P.S., Erickson, T., Gorelick, N., Yadav, K.,
international conference on computer vision, pp. 1026–1034. Congalton, R.G., 2020. Mapping croplands of Europe, middle east, russia, and
Hinton, G.E., Srivastava, N., Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., Salakhutdinov, R.R., 2012. central asia using landsat, random forest, and google earth engine. ISPRS J.
Improving neural networks by preventing co-adaptation of feature detectors. arXiv Photogramm. Remote Sens. 167, 104–122.
preprint arXiv:1207.0580. Radiuk, P.M., 2017. Impact of training set batch size on the performance of
Hopfield, J.J., 1982. Neural networks and physical systems with emergent collective convolutional neural networks for diverse datasets. Inf. Technol. Manage. Sci. 20,
computational abilities. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 79 (8), 2554–2558. 20–24.
Huang, L., Luo, J., Lin, Z., Niu, F., Liu, L., 2020. Using deep learning to map retrogressive Raileanu, L.E., Stoffel, K., 2004. Theoretical comparison between the gini index and
thaw slumps in the Beiluhe region (Tibetan Plateau) from CubeSat images. Remote information gain criteria. Ann. Math. Artif. Intell. 41 (1), 77–93.
Sens. Environ. 237, 111534. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2019.111534. Rodriguez-Galiano, V.F., Chica-Olmo, M., Abarca-Hernandez, F., Atkinson, P.M.,
Johansen, K., Lopez, O., Tu, Y.-H., Li, T., McCabe, M.F., 2021. Center pivot field Jeganathan, C., 2012a. Random Forest classification of Mediterranean land cover
delineation and mapping: A satellite-driven object-based image analysis approach using multi-seasonal imagery and multi-seasonal texture. Remote Sens. Environ.

delineation and mapping: A satellite-driven object-based image analysis approach using multi-seasonal imagery and multi-seasonal texture. Remote Sens. Environ.
for national scale accounting. ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens. 175, 1–19. 121, 93–107.
Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., Hinton, G.E., 2012. Imagenet classification with deep Rodriguez-Galiano, V.F., Ghimire, B., Rogan, J., Chica-Olmo, M., Rigol-Sanchez, J.P.,
convolutional neural networks. In: Advances in neural information processing 2012b. An assessment of the effectiveness of a random forest classifier for land-cover
systems, pp. 1097–1105. classification. ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens. 67, 93–104.
Lebourgeois, V., Dupuy, S., Vintrou, E´ ., Ameline, M., Butler, S., B´egu´e, A., 2017.
A combined random forest and OBIA classification scheme for mapping smallholder
100

T. Li et al. I S P R S J o u r n a l o f P h o t o g r a m m e t r y a n d R e m o t e S e n s i n g186(2022)83–101
Ronneberger, O., Fischer, P., Brox, T., 2015. U-net: Convolutional networks for Tang, J., Zhang, Z., Zhao, L., Tang, P., 2021b. Increasing shape bias to improve the
biomedical image segmentation. In: International Conference on Medical image precision of center pivot irrigation system detection. Remote Sensing 13 (4), 612.
computing and computer-assisted intervention. Springer, pp. 234–241. https://doi.org/10.3390/rs13040612.
Rousseeuw, P.J., 1987. Silhouettes: a graphical aid to the interpretation and validation of Tao, S., Wu, F., Guo, Q., Wang, Y., Li, W., Xue, B., Hu, X., Li, P., Tian, D.i., Li, C., Yao, H.,
cluster analysis. J. Comput. Appl. Math. 20, 53–65. Li, Y., Xu, G., Fang, J., 2015. Segmenting tree crowns from terrestrial and mobile
Ruder, S., 2016. An overview of gradient descent optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint LiDAR data by exploring ecological theories. ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens.
arXiv:1609.04747. 110, 66–76.
Rundquist, D.C., Hoffman, R.O., Carlson, M.P., Cook, A.E., 1989. Nebraska center-pivot Tung, F., Wong, A., Clausi, D.A., 2010. Enabling scalable spectral clustering for image
inventory: an example of operational satellite remote sensing on a long-term basis. segmentation. Pattern Recogn. 43 (12), 4069–4076.
Photogramm. Eng. Remote Sens. 55, 587–590. Turker, M., Kok, E.H., 2013. Field-based sub-boundary extraction from remote sensing
Rydberg, A., Borgefors, G., 2001. Integrated method for boundary delineation of imagery using perceptual grouping. ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens. 79,
agricultural fields in multispectral satellite images. IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. 106–121.
39 (11), 2514–2520. Vermote, E., Justice, C., Claverie, M., Franch, B., 2016. Preliminary analysis of the
´

39 (11), 2514–2520. Vermote, E., Justice, C., Claverie, M., Franch, B., 2016. Preliminary analysis of the
´
Saraiva, M., Protas, E., Salgado, M., Souza Jr, C., 2020. Automatic mapping of center performance of the Landsat 8/OLI land surface reflectance product. Remote Sens.
pivot irrigation systems from satellite images using deep learning. Remote Sensing Environ. 185, 46–56.
12, 558. Vieira, M.A., Formaggio, A.R., Renno´, C.D., Atzberger, C., Aguiar, D.A., Mello, M.P.,
Schaffer, C., 1993. Selecting a classification method by cross-validation. Mach. Learn. 13 2012. Object Based Image Analysis and Data Mining applied to a remotely sensed
(1), 135–143. Landsat time-series to map sugarcane over large areas. Remote Sens. Environ. 123,
Scheffler, D., Hollstein, A., Diedrich, H., Segl, K., Hostert, P., 2017. AROSICS: an 553–562.
automated and robust open-source image co-registration software for multi-sensor von Luxburg, U., 2007. A tutorial on spectral clustering. Stat. Comput. 17 (4), 395–416.
satellite data. Remote Sensing 9 (7), 676. https://doi.org/10.3390/rs9070676. Waldner, F., Diakogiannis, F.I., 2020. Deep learning on edge: extracting field boundaries
Schmidhuber, J., 2015. Deep learning in neural networks: An overview. Neural Netw. 61, from satellite images with a convolutional neural network. Remote Sens. Environ.
85–117. 245, 111741. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2020.111741.
Schmidt, G., Jenkerson, C.B., Masek, J., Vermote, E., Gao, F., 2013. Landsat ecosystem Watkins, B., van Niekerk, A., 2019. A comparison of object-based image analysis
disturbance adaptive processing system (LEDAPS) algorithm description. In: US approaches for field boundary delineation using multi-temporal Sentinel-2 imagery.
Geological Survey. Comput. Electron. Agric. 158, 294–302.
Seth, N.M., 2015. Analyzing the increase in center pivot irrigation systems in Custer Xia, X., Liang, H., RongFeng, Y., Kun, Y., 2018. Oil tank extraction in high-resolution

Seth, N.M., 2015. Analyzing the increase in center pivot irrigation systems in Custer Xia, X., Liang, H., RongFeng, Y., Kun, Y., 2018. Oil tank extraction in high-resolution
County, Nebraska USA from 2003 to 2010. Pap. Resour. Anal. 17, 15. remote sensing images based on deep learning. In: 2018 26th International
Shi, J., Malik, J., 2000. Normalized cuts and image segmentation. Departmental Papers Conference on Geoinformatics. IEEE, pp. 1–6.
(CIS) 107. Yan, L., Roy, D.P., 2016. Conterminous United States crop field size quantification from
Simonyan, K., Zisserman, A., 2014. Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale multi-temporal Landsat data. Remote Sens. Environ. 172, 67–86.
image recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556. Yan, L., Roy, D.P., 2014. Automated crop field extraction from multi-temporal Web
Song, X., Wang, J., Huang, W., Liu, L., Yan, G., Pu, R., 2009. The delineation of Enabled Landsat Data. Remote Sens. Environ. 144, 42–64.
agricultural management zones with high resolution remotely sensed data. Precis. Zhang, C., Yue, P., Di, L., Wu, Z., 2018. Automatic identification of center pivot irrigation
Agric. 10 (6), 471–487. systems from landsat images using convolutional neural networks. Agriculture 8
Tan, P.-N., Steinbach, M., Kumar, V., 2006. Cluster analysis: basic concepts and (10), 147. https://doi.org/10.3390/agriculture8100147.
algorithms. Introd. Data Min. 8, 526–533. Zhang, X., Jiao, L., Liu, F., Bo, L., Gong, M., 2008. Spectral clustering ensemble applied to
Tang, J., Arvor, D., Corpetti, T., Tang, P., 2021a. Mapping center pivot irrigation systems SAR image segmentation. IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. 46 (7), 2126–2136.
in the Southern Amazon from sentinel-2 images. Water 13 (3), 298. https://doi.org/ Zhao, W., Yang, H., Shen, Z., Luo, J., 2015. Oil tanks extraction from high resolution
10.3390/w13030298. imagery using a directional and weighted hough voting method. J. Indian Soc.
Remote Sens. 43 (3), 539–549.
101

